Started a batch of Red Ale today.

Got a long pot thermometer for Christmas and decided to use that for monitoring my steeping of grains.
When I went to unwrap it, the glass on the thermometer was broken so I picked all the glass out to make sure it wouldn’t fall into the pot.  I used this thermometer to steep the grains for 20 minutes and made sure the temperature didn't exceed 165 degrees.  

I turned up the heat and got a gentle boil going before putting in the rest of the LME and notice it didn't take long at all to get to the boil.  I checked the termometer again and noticed it was still showing the 165 degrees - Uh, oh!  Termometer is broken..

I'm a little concerned that the steeping of grains may have been higher than 165 degrees and tannis were released that shouldn't have been.

Also the hot break never really formed either - it was pretty mild compared to any other hot breaks I've had.

Everything else with my brew day when off without issues.  So we will see what the results are.


Final Notes...

I have no idea what the heck happened to this batch.  I had an original gravity with 4 gallons of wort of about 1.053 and was concerned about adding water to get to 5 gallons in the fermenter as that would dilute the batch.  So I left it as is.

I checked on the fermentation process about 12-18 hours later and it was in full swing, so I figured everything was good.  I measured the specific gravity a week after and that was 1.021 and fermentation was pretty much idle.  I thought about kegging it as is, but that would have been the earliest I kegged or bottled any previous beers.  So I decided to let it go another week.

I meastured the SG again today and it showed 1.025 - it went up?  Not sure I've ever seen that before, so I figured I'd better keg it, start the carbonation process and give it a couple weeks in the keg and see what it tastes like.

Final ABV comes out to about a 3.675% which is about 2 percent lower than what it should be.  I highly suspect the thermometer was wrong as noted above.
