Brewer's Notes

Brew Master: Zachary H. Burns
Brew Name: Bearded Logger Lager
Brew Type: American Ale via Malt Extract
Brew Date: 11/11/2017

Notes:

I was actually making an Ale style beer via a starter kit received with a set of starter equipment, but couldn't resist using a recent photo of me for my start into home brewing beer.

I just completed the batch and it's in the fermenter.  Some notes from a 30,000 foot view...

I'm not sure I like the partial boil method.  I don't like taking a lot of time making a batch of beer, then waiting weeks for fermentation all the while risking a contamination event.  So I may look at getting equipment to do a full boil as I can see myself enjoying the hobby.  I've waited literally years to do this - initially read UseNet newsgroups and printed off all kinds of FAQ's to do this, but just never pulled the trigger.  I finally did today.

Now on to my brewer's notes.

1:45pm - Put 1 pound of "Crystal" grains into a nylon bag, then steeped in 3 gallons of water over a propane flame.  I monitored the temperature - timing it so I pulled them after 30 minutes - making sure temperature didn't go above 160 degrees and also made sure to not have anything touch bottom of stainless steel pot while heating (afraid of scorching).  I dumped the grains from this bag and re-used it in the following steps (not sure how expensive they are and wanted to conserve).

2:15 - Removed grain bag, careful not to squeeze, but let drip dry.  Turned up heat to start a rolling boil

2:28 - Turned off heat and emptied 7 pounds of Malt Extract bag into pot, stirring all the time.

2:34 - Heat back on and return to boil - stirred often (wasn't sure if malt was fully mixed and didn't want it to settle)

2:42 - Achieved mild "Hot Break" (mostly because I was vigorously watching it) and adjusted heat accordingly as to not get a boil over.  Added 1 ounce of "Magnum" bittering hops to the rolling boil in a nylon bag suspended for 55 minutes.  I love the smell of the process at this point.  The hops smell great!

3:38 - Added 1 ounce of "Cascade" flavoring hops to the nylon bag and left for remaining boil (5 minutes).  I also added something called Whirlfloc (which is some kind of clarifier I guess - I added half the tablet)

3:42 - Added 1 ounce of "Cascade" aroma hops to the nylon bag and left for remaining boil (1 minute).

3:43 - Turned off the heat to stop the boil.  Removed bag and let drip dry into wort.  I then took the wort inside and stuck in ice-water bath to attempt cool to 130 degrees.  I had the lid off part of the time and also accidentally added about 1 to 2 ounces of tap water to the wort when moving the spigot on the sink.

I failed to determine what time it was when the wort was cool enough to put into the fermenter, but I was concerned with getting the batch to a stable, clean, secure environment as quickly as possible as to not contaminate the batch.

During that time, I added 2 gallons of water to the fermentor, added the 130 degree wort to the fermentor, then added about a half gallon of water to bring the volume in the fermentor to about 5 gallons.  The temperature of the wort at this stage was about 68 degrees or so - I used a sanitized thermometer, but not sure I should have.  We will see.

I failed to take the advice of adding the yeast to warm water also, I followed the packet directions and just sprinkled it onto the wort and make sure the lid was on tight.  I did put the bubbler and stopper on, but it doesn't seem very tight (like it could let in contaminants) and the stopper visibly moved.  So I taped it down so it accidentally wouldn't blow out when fermentation starts.

I placed it in the basement furnace room which should be less than 70 degrees.  Will check it daily to see if any fermentation starts, etc.

11/11/2017 - Checked the fermentor later that night (about 10:00pm or so) and noticed a little activity - interesting.

11/12/2017 - Checked the fermentor on Sunday in the morning and it had vigorous internal activity.  Not much bubbling out the top of the airlock - but not sure if it was supposed to at this time.  I figured airlock activity would happen a couple of days later for a week or so.  I checked it several more times thoughout the day and it still had vigorous activity.  Thinking the yeast went crazy.

11/13/2017 - Came home from work (forgot to check this morning) and went to the basement to check the fermentation and was suprised to see no bubbling out the airlock and the yeast, etc was basically settled to the bottom.  Could fermentation be done?  I want to take a gravity reading, but also don't want to disturb anything.  I'll take a reading in a day or so, then again a couple days after that.  Hopefully, the yeast just got lazy and aren't dead.  The fermentator currently reads 72 degrees.
